.\"
.\" sedx.1 - SedX manual page
.\" Copyright (c) 2025 InkyQuill
.\" Licensed under MIT License
.\"
.TH "SEDX" "1" "February 2025" "sedx 0.2.0-alpha" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
sedx \- Safe sed with preview, context, and automatic rollback
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fBsedx\fP [\fIOPTIONS\fP] \fIEXPRESSION\fP \fIFILE\fR...
.PP
\fBsedx\fP \fICOMMAND\fP [\fIARGUMENTS\fP]
.PP
\fBcat\fP \fIFILE\fP | \fBsedx\fP [\fIOPTIONS\fP] \fIEXPRESSION\fP
.SH DESCRIPTION
SedX is a modern replacement for GNU sed written in Rust. It provides safe file
editing with automatic backups, dry-run mode, and easy rollback. Unlike sed,
sedx shows you exactly what will change before applying modifications.
.PP
\fBKey Features:\fP
.RS 4
.IP \(bu 2
Automatic backups before every modification
.IP \(bu 2
Dry-run mode to preview changes (default behavior)
.IP \(bu 2
One-command rollback of any operation
.IP \(bu 2
Colored diff output with context
.IP \(bu 2
PCRE (modern regex) by default
.IP \(bu 2
ERE/BRE modes for GNU sed compatibility
.IP \(bu 2
~90% GNU sed compatibility
.IP \(bu 2
Streaming mode for files >= 100MB (constant memory usage)
.RE
.PP
\fBRegex Modes:\fP
.RS 4
.TP
\fBPCRE\fR (default)
Modern Perl-Compatible Regular Expressions. No escaping needed for metacharacters: \fB(\fP, \fB)\fP, \fB+\fP, \fB?\fP, \fB|\fP, \fB{\fP, \fB}\fP.
.TP
\fB-ER\fPE, \fB--ere\fR
Extended Regular Expressions (like \fBsed -E\fR). Same syntax as PCRE for most operations.
.TP
\fB-BR\E, \fB--bre\fR
Basic Regular Expressions (like GNU sed). Requires escaping: \fB\\(\fP, \fB\\)\fP, \fB\\+\fP, \fB\\?\fP, \fB\\|\fP.
.RE
.SH OPTIONS
.SS General Options
.TP
\fB-d\fR, \fB--dry-run\fR
Preview changes without modifying files. This is the default behavior.
.TP
\fB-i\fR, \fB--interactive\fR
Ask for confirmation before applying each change.
.TP
\fB-n\fR, \fB--quiet\fR, \fB--silent\fR
Suppress automatic output. Only lines explicitly printed with \fBp\fR command are shown.
Useful with expressions like: \fBsedx -n '1,10p'\fP
.TP
\fB-h\fR, \fB--help\fR
Print help information.
.TP
\fB-V\fR, \fB--version\fR
Print version information.
.SS Context Options
.TP
\fB--context\fR=\fINUM\fR
Number of context lines to show around changes (default: 2, max: 10).
Use 0 to show only changed lines.
.TP
\fB--no-context\fR, \fB-nc\fR
Show only changed lines without context. Equivalent to \fB--context=0\fR.
.SS Regex Mode Options
.TP
\fB-B\fR, \fB--bre\fR
Use Basic Regular Expressions (BRE). Like GNU sed: \fB\\(\fP \fB\\)\fP, \fB\\+\fP, \fB\\?\fP, \fB\\|\fP.
.TP
\fB-E\fR, \fB--ere\fR
Use Extended Regular Expressions (ERE). Like \fBsed -E\fP: \fB(\fP \fB)\fP, \fB+\fP, \fB?\fP, \fB|\fP.
.SS Backup Options
.TP
\fB--no-backup\fR, \fB--force\fR
Skip creating a backup (requires both flags). Changes cannot be undone.
Recommended only for files under version control.
.TP
\fB--backup-dir\fR=\fIDIR\fR
Use custom directory for backups instead of \fI~/.sedx/backups/\fP.
.SS Streaming Options
.TP
\fB--streaming\fR
Enable streaming mode for large files (auto-detects at 100MB).
.TP
\fB--no-streaming\fR
Disable auto-detection and force in-memory processing.
.SS Expression Options
.TP
\fB-e\fR \fIEXPR\fR, \fB--expression\fR=\fIEXPR\fR
Add a sed expression (can be specified multiple times). Expressions are applied in the order given.
.RS
.EX
.EE
sedx -e 's/foo/bar/' -e 's/baz/qux/' file.txt
.RE
.TP
\fB-f\fR \fIFILE\fR, \fB--file\fR=\fIFILE\fR
Read sed script from a file. The file should contain sed commands, one per line.
Supports shebang: \fB#!/usr/bin/sedx -f\fP
.RS
.EX
.EE
sedx -f script.sed file.txt
.RE
.SH COMMANDS
.SS rollback
.TP
\fBsedx rollback\fR [\fIID\fR]
Rollback a previous operation. If no backup ID is specified, rolls back the most recent operation.
.RS
.EX
.EE
# Rollback last operation
sedx rollback
.EE
# Rollback specific backup
sedx rollback 20250125-120000-abc123
.RE
.TP
\fBsedx history\fR
Display a log of all sedx operations. Shows timestamp, expression, files affected, and backup location.
.TP
\fBsedx status\fR
Display backup directory location and disk usage.
.SS backup
.TP
\fBsedx backup list\fR [\fB-v\fR|\fB--verbose\fR]
List all backups with details.
.TP
\fBsedx backup show\fR \fIID\fR
Show detailed information about a specific backup.
.TP
\fBsedx backup restore\fR \fIID\fR
Restore files from a backup (alias for \fBrollback\fR).
.TP
\fBsedx backup remove\fR [\fB-f\fR|\fB--force\fR] \fIID\fR
Permanently delete a backup.
.TP
\fBsedx backup prune\fR [\fB--keep\fR=\fIN\fR] [\fB--keep-days\fR=\fIN\fR] [\fB-f\fR|\fB--force\fR]
Remove old backups, keeping only recent ones.
.RS
.EX
.EE
# Keep only 10 most recent backups
sedx backup prune --keep=10
.EE
# Keep only backups from last 7 days
sedx backup prune --keep-days=7
.RE
.SS config
.TP
\fBsedx config\fR
Open configuration file in text editor (\fI~/.sedx/config.toml\fP).
.TP
\fBsedx config --show\fR
Show current configuration without editing.
.SH EXPRESSIONS
SedX supports most GNU sed expressions. All commands must use sed syntax (e.g., \fBs/old/new/\fP, not \fBold new\fR).
.SS Substitution
.RS
.PP
\fBs/pattern/replacement/flags\fR
.PP
Replace text matching \fIpattern\fP with \fIreplacement\fP.
.PP
\fBFlags:\fP
.IP \(bu 2
\fBg\fR - Replace all occurrences in each line
.IP \(bu 2
\fBi\fR - Case-insensitive matching
.IP \(bu 2
\fBN\fR - Replace Nth occurrence only (0-9)
.IP \(bu 2
\fBp\fR - Print the modified line
.RE
.RS
.EX
.EE
# Replace first occurrence
sedx 's/foo/bar/' file.txt
.EE
# Replace all occurrences (global)
sedx 's/foo/bar/g' file.txt
.EE
# Case-insensitive substitution
sedx 's/HELLO/world/gi' file.txt
.EE
# Replace 2nd occurrence only
sedx 's/foo/bar/2' file.txt
.EE
# With backreferences (PCRE syntax)
sedx 's/([a-z]+) \\1/\\1/g' file.txt
.RE
.SS Delete
.RS
.PP
\fB[range]d\fR
.PP
Delete lines in range.
.RE
.RS
.EX
.EE
# Delete line 5
sedx '5d' file.txt
.EE
# Delete lines 5-10
sedx '5,10d' file.txt
.EE
# Delete lines matching pattern
sedx '/error/d' file.txt
.EE
# Delete all lines except matching pattern
sedx '/keep/!d' file.txt
.RE
.SS Print
.RS
.PP
\fB[range]p\fR
.PP
Print lines in range (use with \fB-n\fR to suppress automatic output).
.RE
.RS
.EX
.EE
# Print first 10 lines only
sedx -n '1,10p' file.txt
.EE
# Print lines matching pattern
sedx -n '/error/p' file.txt
.RE
.SS Quit
.RS
.PP
\fB[address]q\fR
.PP
Stop processing after current line.
.RE
.RS
.EX
.EE
# Stop after line 10
sedx '10q' file.txt
.EE
# Stop when pattern found
sedx '/DONE/q' file.txt
.RE
.SS Insert / Append / Change
.RS
.PP
\fB[address]i\\ntext\fR
.br
Insert \fItext\fR before line.
.PP
\fB[address]a\\ntext\fR
.br
Append \fItext\fR after line.
.PP
\fB[address]c\\ntext\fR
.br
Change line to \fItext\fR.
.RE
.RS
.EX
.EE
# Insert header at line 1
sedx '1i\\n# Header' file.txt
.EE
# Append footer at end
sedx '$a\\n# End of file' file.txt
.EE
# Replace line 5 with new text
sedx '5c\\nNew content here' file.txt
.RE
.SS Command Grouping
.RS
.PP
\fB[range]{cmd1; cmd2; ...}\fR
.PP
Execute multiple commands for lines in range.
.RE
.RS
.EX
.EE
# Multiple substitutions
sedx '{s/foo/bar/g; s/baz/qux/g}' file.txt
.EE
# Group with range
sedx '1,10{s/a/A/g; s/b/B/g}' file.txt
.RE
.SS Hold Space Operations
.RS
.PP
Hold space is a secondary buffer for advanced text manipulation:
.PP
\fBh\fR - Copy pattern space to hold space (overwrite)
.br
\fBH\fR - Append pattern space to hold space (with newline)
.br
\fBg\fR - Copy hold space to pattern space (overwrite)
.br
\fBG\fR - Append hold space to pattern space (with newline)
.br
\fBx\fR - Exchange pattern space and hold space
.RE
.RS
.EX
.EE
# Double-space a file
sedx 'G' file.txt
.EE
# Reverse lines of a file (similar to tac)
sedx '1!G;h;$!d' file.txt
.EE
# Print last line
sedx '$!d' file.txt
.RE
.SS Flow Control (Phase 5)
.RS
.PP
\fB:label\fR
.br
Define a branch target.
.PP
\fB[range]b\fR [label]
.br
Unconditional branch to label (or end of script if no label).
.PP
\fB[range]t\fR [label]
.br
Branch to label if substitution was made since last input.
.PP
\fB[range]T\fR [label]
.br
Branch to label if NO substitution was made since last input.
.RE
.RS
.EX
.EE
# Loop until no more substitutions
sedx ':top; s/foo/bar/; t top' file.txt
.EE
# Conditional branching
sedx 's/foo/bar/; t success; s/baz/qux/; b done; :success' file.txt
.RE
.SS File I/O (Phase 5)
.RS
.PP
\fB[address]r\fR filename
.br
Read file and append contents to output.
.PP
\fB[address]w\fR filename
.br
Write pattern space to file.
.PP
\fB[address]R\fR filename
.br
Read one line from file and append to pattern space.
.PP
\fB[address]W\fR filename
.br
Write first line of pattern space to file.
.RE
.RS
.EX
.EE
# Insert header file at line 1
sedx '1r header.txt' file.txt
.EE
# Write all lines to output
sedx 'w output.txt' file.txt
.EE
# Extract errors to separate file
sedx '/error/w errors.log' logfile.txt
.RE
.SS Additional Commands
.RS
.PP
\fB[range]=\fR
.br
Print current line number to stdout.
.PP
\fB[range]F\fR
.br
Print current filename to stdout.
.PP
\fB[range]z\fR
.br
Clear pattern space (GNU sed extension).
.RE
.SH ADDRESSING
Addresses determine which lines commands operate on.
.SS Address Types
.TP
\fBN\fR
Line number (1-indexed).
.TP
\fB$\fR
Last line.
.TP
\fB/pattern/\fR
Lines matching regular expression.
.TP
\fB0\fR
Special address before first line (for insert operations).
.TP
\fB!\fR
Negation - applies to lines NOT matching the address.
.SS Address Ranges
.TP
\fBstart,end\fR
From start to end, inclusive.
.TP
\fBstart,+N\fR
From start for N lines.
.TP
\fBstart~step\fR
Every step-th line starting from start (e.g., \fB1~2\fR for every 2nd line).
.RE
.RS
.EX
.EE
# Lines 5 through 10
sedx '5,10d' file.txt
.EE
# From line 5 to end
sedx '5,$d' file.txt
.EE
# 3 lines after pattern match
sedx '/start/,+3d' file.txt
.EE
# Every 3rd line
sedx '1~3d' file.txt
.EE
# From pattern to pattern
sedx '/<html>/,/<\\/html>/d' file.txt
.RE
.SH REGULAR EXPRESSIONS
.SS PCRE (Default)
.RS
.IP \(bu 2
\fB(...)\fP - Capturing group
.IP \(bu 2
\fB+\fP - One or more
.IP \(bu 2
\fB?\fP - Zero or one
.IP \(bu 2
\fB*\fP - Zero or more
.IP \(bu 2
\fB|\fP - Alternation (OR)
.IP \(bu 2
\fB{n,m}\fP - Range quantifier
.IP \(bu 2
\fB[abc]\fP - Character class
.IP \(bu 2
\fB[^abc]\fP - Negated class
.IP \(bu 2
\fB\\d\fP, \fB\\w\fP, \fB\\s\fP - Shorthand classes
.IP \(bu 2
\fB^\fP, \fB$\fP - Start/end of line
.RE
.SS BRE Mode (\fB-B\fR flag)
.RS
All metacharacters must be escaped:
.IP \(bu 2
\fB\\(\\)\fP - Grouping (instead of \fB()\fP)
.IP \(bu 2
\fB\\+\fP - One or more (instead of \fB+\fP)
.IP \(bu 2
\fB\\?\fP - Zero or one (instead of \fB?\fP)
.IP \(bu 2
\fB\\|\\)\fP - Alternation (instead of \fB|\fP)
.IP \(bu 2
\fB\\{n,m\\}\fP - Range quantifier (instead of \fB{n,m}\fP)
.RE
.SS Backreferences
.RS
\fBPatterns\fR: Use \fB\\1\fP, \fB\\2\fP, etc.
.br
\fBReplacements\fR: Use \fB$1\fP, \fB$2\fP, etc. (SedX converts \fB\\1\fP to \fB$1\fP automatically)
.RE
.RS
.EX
.EE
# Swap two words (PCRE)
sedx 's/([a-z]+) ([a-z]+)/$2 $1/' file.txt
.EE
# Same in BRE mode
sedx -B 's/\\([a-z]\\+\\) \\([a-z]\\+\\)/\\2 \\1/' file.txt
.RE
.SH EXAMPLES
.SS Basic Operations
.RS
.EX
.EE
# Replace all occurrences
sedx 's/foo/bar/g' file.txt
.EE
# Delete specific lines
sedx '/^#/d' file.txt
.EE
# Print specific lines (with -n flag)
sedx -n '10,20p' file.txt
.RE
.SS Pattern-Based Operations
.RS
.EX
.EE
# Only substitute in lines matching pattern
sedx '/error/s/test/fix/' file.txt
.EE
# Delete between two patterns
sedx '/<html>/,/<\\/html>/d' file.txt
.EE
# Negation - delete lines NOT matching pattern
sedx '/keep/!d' file.txt
.RE
.SS Advanced Text Manipulation
.RS
.EX
.EE
# Remove duplicate adjacent lines
sedx 'G; s/\\(.*\\)\\n\\1/\\1/; t; h' file.txt
.EE
# Add line numbers
sedx '=' file.txt | sedx 'N; s/\\n/ /'
.EE
# Join every 2 lines
sedx 'N; s/\\n/ /' file.txt
.RE
.SS Pipeline Usage
.RS
.EX
.EE
# Read from stdin, write to stdout
cat file.txt | sedx 's/foo/bar/g'
.EE
# Chain multiple commands
cat file.txt | sedx 's/foo/bar/g' | grep bar
.EE
# Process command output
ps aux | sedx '1d' | grep nginx
.EE
# Case-insensitive pipeline
echo "HELLO world" | sedx 's/hello/WORLD/gi'
.RE
.SS Backup and Rollback
.RS
.EX
.EE
# View history
sedx history
.EE
# Show backup status
sedx status
.EE
# Rollback last operation
sedx rollback
.EE
# Rollback specific backup
sedx rollback 20250125-120000-abc123
.RE
.SH STDIN/STDOUT MODE
When no files are specified, SedX reads from stdin and writes to stdout.
This makes it compatible with Unix pipelines.
.RS
.EX
.EE
# Read from stdin, write to stdout
echo "hello world" | sedx 's/hello/HELLO/'
.EE
# Use in pipelines
cat file.txt | sedx 's/foo/bar/g' | grep bar
.EE
# Process command output
docker logs nginx 2>/dev/null | sedx '/error/d'
.RE
.PP
\fBStdin mode characteristics:\fP
.RS 4
.IP \(bu 2
No backups created (can't backup a stream)
.IP \(bu 2
No diff output (only transformed text)
.IP \(bu 2
Works with all regex flavors
.RE
.SH BACKUPS
Backups are created automatically before every modification.
.SS Backup Location
.RS
.PP
\fI~/.sedx/backups/\fP
.PP
Each backup is stored in a timestamped directory:
.sp
\fI~/.sedx/backups/YYYYMMDD-HHMMSS-XXXXXXXX/\fP
.br
  operation.json  # Metadata (expression, timestamp, files)
.br
  files/          # Original file contents
.RE
.SS Backup Lifecycle
.RS
.IP \(bu 2
Backups created before file modifications
.IP \(bu 2
Last 50 backups kept automatically
.IP \(bu 2
Old backups cleaned up on new operations
.IP \(bu 2
Backup removed after successful rollback
.RE
.SS Manual Backup Management
.RS
.EX
.EE
# List all backups
sedx backup list
.EE
# Show backup details
sedx backup show 20250125-120000-abc123
.EE
# Remove specific backup
sedx backup remove 20250125-120000-abc123
.EE
# Keep only 10 most recent
sedx backup prune --keep=10
.RE
.SH DIFF OUTPUT
SedX uses colored output to show changes:
.RS 4
.IP \(bu 2
\fBGreen (+)\fR - Lines that will be added
.IP \(bu 2
\fBRed (-)\fR - Lines that will be deleted
.IP \(bu 2
\fBYellow (→)\fR - Lines that will be modified
.IP \(bu 2
\fBDefault\fR - Context lines (unchanged)
.RE
.PP
Set \fBNO_COLOR=1\fP environment variable to disable colors.
.SH STREAMING MODE
For files >= 100MB, SedX automatically switches to streaming mode:
.RS
.IP \(bu 2
Constant memory usage (<100MB regardless of file size)
.IP \(bu 2
Line-by-line processing
.IP \(bu 2
Sliding window for diff context
.RE
.PP
Streaming threshold configurable via:
.RS
.IP \(bu 2
\fB~/.sedx/config.toml\fP: \fBmax_memory_mb\fP setting
.IP \(bu 2
\fB--no-streaming\fP flag to disable
.RE
.SH CONFIGURATION
SedX stores configuration in \fI~/.sedx/config.toml\fP:
.RS
.EX
.EE
[backup]
max_size_gb = 2                  # Warn for large backups
max_disk_usage_percent = 60      # Error if disk usage too high
backup_dir = "/custom/path"      # Optional custom location

[compatibility]
mode = "pcre"                    # Default regex flavor: pcre, ere, or bre
show_warnings = true             # Show compatibility warnings

[processing]
context_lines = 2                # Diff context (max: 10)
max_memory_mb = 100              # Streaming threshold
streaming = true                 # Enable auto-detection
.RE
.PP
Edit with: \fBsedx config\fP
.br
View with: \fBsedx config --show\fP
.SH DIFFERENCES FROM GNU SED
.TP
\fBRegex Syntax\fR
SedX uses PCRE by default (modern, no escaping). Use \fB-B\fR flag for BRE compatibility.
.TP
\fBAutomatic Backups\fR
SedX creates backups automatically. sed requires manual \fB-i\fP flag with backup argument.
.TP
\fBDry-run Mode\fR
SedX previews changes by default. sed has no preview mode.
.TP
\fBPattern Substitution\fR
\fB/error/s/test/fix/\fR applies to ALL matching lines (GNU sed compatible).
.TP
\fBIn-place Editing\fR
SedX doesn't support \fB-i\fR flag. Files are modified in place with automatic backup.
Use \fB--rollback\fP to undo changes.
.TP
\fBBackreference Syntax\fR
SedX uses \fB$1\fP, \fB$2\fP in replacements (converted from \fB\\1\fP, \fB\\2\fR automatically).
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
\fB0\fR
Changes were successfully applied (or preview shown)
.TP
\fB1\fR
An error occurred
.TP
\fB2\fR
Invalid command-line arguments
.SH FILES
.TP
\fI~/.sedx/backups/\fR
Default backup directory
.TP
\fI~/.sedx/config.toml\fR
Configuration file
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
\fBSEDX_BACKUP_DIR\fR
Override default backup directory location
.TP
\fBEDITOR\fR, \fBVISUAL\fR
Editor used by \fBsedx config\fR command
.TP
\fBNO_COLOR\fR
Disable colored output (set to any value)
.SH REPORTING BUGS
GitHub Issues: \fIhttps://github.com/InkyQuill/sedx/issues\fR
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR sed (1),
.BR awk (1),
.BR grep (1),
.BR perlre (1)
.SH AUTHOR
InkyQuill <\fIhttps://github.com/InkyQuill\fR>
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright (C) 2025 InkyQuill
.LP
Licensed under the MIT License. Source code available at:
.br
\fIhttps://github.com/InkyQuill/sedx\fR
